By default, all new synth, MIDI and CV clips are put into scale mode - locked to a major scale. There are many other options, however.

The first alternative worth mentioning is to exit scale mode entirely, by pressing the “scale” button so that it is no longer illuminated. Neighbouring rows of pads will now be only a semitone apart, giving you access to a chromatic scale. Any notes that you previously created, while in scale mode, will still exist, but you will likely see some of them move to a different pad-row as you exit scale mode to make room for a newly-accessible semitone’s row. Remember that you can scroll up and down - this may be even more necessary now that the “working area” has expanded vertically. You can press the “scale” button again at any time to re-enter scale mode.

To change to a different scale, press shift+scale. The Deluge will cycle through the 7 Western-music “modes”, displaying the name of each on the text display: major (ionian), minor (aeolian), dorian, phrygian, lydian, mixolydian, and locrian. If the Deluge instead displays the error message “CAN’T”, this is because the current scale has more than 7 notes. See below for how to create a custom scale - perhaps you did so accidentally.

When re-entering scale mode (pressing the “scale” button when it was not previously illuminated), the Deluge will examine the notes that are present, and make an educated guess as to their scale and the scale’s root note / key. For instance, if the Deluge detects the presence of a minor third note relative to the root note, it will be likely to conclude that the scale is minor.

Scales on the Deluge will usually contain seven different notes (eight if you count the octave - the same as most Western scales). However, sometimes there will be more notes - for instance, if both a major 3rd and a minor 3rd are present when entering scale mode, both will be added to the scale.

The root note (at every octave) is indicated, anytime that a clip is in scale mode, with its audition pad permanently illuminated. If you wish to change the root note (e.g. if the Deluge guessed incorrectly what root note you intended), simply hold down the “scale” button and press the audition pad (or note on the keyboard if in keyboard view) for the note that you intend. You may do this whether or not you were already in scale mode.

The other way that the scale may be altered and customized is by sharpening or flattening the notes present in an existing scale. So long as you are already in scale mode, you may do this as follows: Hold down the audition pad for a given row / note. The note will sound, and the text display will indicate the name of the note (a dot (.) means “sharp”). While holding the audition pad, additionally hold down the select knob and turn it to sharpen or flatten the note. Most times, you can move a note just one semitone in either direction - any further and it would become the same as the next note in the scale, which is not allowed. If you wish to perform this function without the note sounding as you press the audition pad (e.g. because you’re in the middle of a performance), this can be achieved by holding down the shift button before pressing the audition pad.

For songs with multiple clips, all clips that are in scale mode are always locked to the same scale, for convenience. Any change that you make to the scale while editing one clip will affect all others that are also in scale mode. Correspondingly, when the Deluge guesses the scale and root note when re-entering scale mode, the contents of all scale clips will be considered. So if you’re wondering why the Deluge threw some extra notes into your scale that you didn’t expect, it’s likely because you have a different clip which contains those notes!

If you wish to transpose a clip up or down, this can be achieved by holding down the ▼▲ knob and turning it. Doing this alone will transpose a whole octave at a time. If you wish to transpose just a semitone, then hold down the shift button as well while turning.

If you transpose by semitones while in scale mode, then any other clips that are also in scale mode will also be transposed.
